# Configuration Management: Ansible

## What is Ansible?

Ansible is a configuration management tool. It allows system administrators to
define tasks and settings to be applied or run on a system, instead of
configuring it manually.

Ansible has a different approach from other configuration management tools. It
only requires Python to be installed, and does NOT require any extra software on
the target servers. On Linux servers, Ansible works by opening an SSH connection
to the target host. The two requirements for Ansible to work on a target is:

1. have Python installed
2. have a way to connect to the target from the Ansible host (usually SSH)

A very important aspect of Ansible is that it achieves **idempotence**: a
command always achieve the same result, whether it is run once or a thousand
times. This is important for configuration management, where we want to define
the **status** of a machine, or service.

## Ansible concepts

### Control node

A system on which Ansible is installed. You run Ansible commands such as
`ansible` or `ansible-inventory` on a control node. Your WSL instance will be
the control note.

### Managed node

A remote system, or host, that Ansible controls. An individual server managed by
ansible. Your EC2 instances will be the managed node for this course.

### Inventory

The inventory is a collection of "hosts" (machines or artifacts) that can be
provisioned using Ansible. It can be defined statically (the inventory is a
file), or generated by a program dynamically.

In a static inventory, hosts can be specified by DNS name, ssh alias, or IP
address. The inventory can be in INI format, or in YAML format.

Example inventory file (INI format):

    [webservice]
    httpsrv
    dbsrv
    appsrv

This defines a group called _webservice_, which has 3 hosts: _httpsrv_, _dbsrv_
and _appsrv_.

For more information, see
[the documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/intro_inventory.html).

### Modules and Plugins

- "Plugins extend Ansible’s core functionality. Most plugin types execute on the
  control node within the /usr/bin/ansible process"

- "Modules are a type of plugin that execute automation tasks on a ‘target’
  (usually a remote system). Modules work as standalone scripts that Ansible
  executes in their own process outside of the control node."

An Ansible module is a piece of code that executes a specific provisioning task
on a managed host. Some examples of _core_ Ansible modules:

- `file`: to provision a file
- `shell`: to run a shell command (either with a script, or inline)
- `get_url`: to download a file
- `package`: to work with the package manager from the OS

Ansible modules are divided into core modules (included in Ansible) and
community modules (available as a separate package).

#### Finding help about modules

Ansible includes the `ansible-doc` command. Which is a little like man pages for
Ansible. You can see the docs for a module by running `ansible-doc package` for
example. To search for a module, you can use our old friend grep:

`ansible-doc -l | grep ^package`

### Playbooks

Playbooks are the files that define how Ansible modules should be applied to the
hosts in the inventory. They are written using Ansible "grammar" in YAML, and
are meant to be human-readable (text format).

#### Validating your Ansible playbooks

A helpful tool when working with YAML files is `yamllint` which is available in
most package repositories.

Ansible also includes a few commands that can be used to validate your ansible
playbooks.

```bash
$ ansible-playbook --syntax-check webservers.yml
$ ansible-lint webservers.yml
```

### If Ansible modules are the tools in your workshop, playbooks are your instruction manuals, and your inventory of hosts are your raw material.

See the official
[documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks.html)
for more details.

## Variables

Ansible playbooks can also contain variables. Like most variables if you need to
set a value used in multiple locations in your playbook it is a good idea to
create a variable.

Variables can be defined in your inventory, playbook, or in separate variables
files

```yml
---
- hosts: all
  remote_user: root
  vars:
    favcolor: blue
  vars_files:
    - /vars/external_vars.yml

  tasks:
    - name: This is just a placeholder
      ansible.builtin.command: /bin/echo foo
```

variables are referenced with Jinja2 syntax

```yml
dest: "{{ remote_install_path }}/foo.cfg"
```

Note on quoting variables. When you use a variable that contains additional
scalar values, like the example above, you need to wrap the entire value in
quotes.

We will look at variables in more detail when we create more complex playbooks
latter.

### Example Playbooks

1. [Simple Playbook Examples](https://www.middlewareinventory.com/blog/ansible-playbook-example/)
1. [Full Playbook Examples](https://github.com/ansible/ansible-examples) - These
   are role based that we will cover later in the course.

## Lab Part 1: Installing Ansible

You can install Ansible using the supplied script:
[`install_ansible.sh`](/utility/install_ansible.sh) from within your WSL2
environment. This will instal ansible its dependencies and related visual studio
code plugins.

Alternatively you can follow the
[Installation Guide](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/installation_guide/index.html)
and install the `ansible` community package.

After you can check that `ansible` was installed with the command
`ansible --version`

## Lab Part 2: Create playbook: `site.yml` to configure 3 proxy servers and one static web server

The inventory file is given produced by the terraform module in [/examples/wk05](examples/wk05)


### Resources
1. [ Install and Configure Nginx as Service](https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/install-and-configure-nginx#1-overview)
1. [Confingure Nginx for Static Sites](https://dev.to/karthiknarayan/setting-up-nginx-to-serve-static-content-on-any-linux-based-server-1185)
1.  [How To Configure Nginx as a Reverse Proxy on Ubuntu 22.04](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-configure-nginx-as-a-reverse-proxy-on-ubuntu-22-04)
